docs: add developer preview guide for esbuild-based build system (#50068)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/esbuild.md

A new builder named `browser-esbuild` is available within the `@angular-devkit/build-angular` package that is present in an Angular CLI generated application. The build is a drop-in replacement for the existing `browser` builder that provides the current stable browser application build system.
You can try out the new build system for applications that use the `browser` builder. Building libraries with the new build system via `ng-packagr` is not yet possible but library build support will be available in a future release.

### Updating the application configuration

The new build system was implemented to minimize the amount of changes necessary to transition your applications. Currently, the new build system is provided via an alternate builder (`browser-esbuild`). You can update the `build` target for any application target to try out the new build system.

The following is what you would typically find in `angular.json` for an application:

<code-example language="json" hideCopy="true">
...
"architect": {
  "build": {
    "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser",
...
</code-example>

Changing the `builder` field is the only change you will need to make.

> ```diff

Reviewer: Hmm, doesn't look like AIO is rendering this very well. Maybe it would be better to just drop it altogether and do another pure JSON snippet? Up to you.

</div>

### Unimplemented options and behavior

Several build options are not yet implemented but will be implemented in the future as the build system moves towards a stable status. If your application uses these options, you can still try out the build system without removing them. Warnings will be issued for any unimplemented options but they will otherwise be ignored. However, if your application relies on any of these options to function, you may want to wait to try.

- [Bundle budgets](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25100) (`budgets`)
- [Localization](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25099) (`localize`/`i18nDuplicateTranslation`/`i18nMissingTranslation`)
- [Web workers](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25101) (`webWorkerTsConfig`)
- [WASM imports](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25102) -- WASM can still be loaded manually via [standard web APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Loading_and_running).

### ESM default imports vs. namespace imports

> TypeScript by default allows default exports to be imported as namespace imports and then used in call expressions. This is unfortunately a divergence from the ECMAScript specification. The underlying bundler (`esbuild`) within the new build system expects ESM code that conforms to the specification. The build system will now generate a warning if your application uses an incorrect type of import of a package. However, to allow TypeScript to accept the correct usage, a TypeScript option must be enabled within the application's `tsconfig` file. When enabled, the [esModuleInterop](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#esModuleInterop) option provides better alignment with the ECMAScript specification and is also recommended by TypeScript. Once enabled, you can update package imports where applicable to an ECMAScript conformant form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript by default allows default exports to be imported as namespace imports and then used in call expressions. This is unfortunately a divergence from the ECMAScript specification. The underlying bundler (`esbuild`) within the new build system expects ESM code that conforms to the specification. The build system will now generate a warning if your application uses an incorrect type of import of a package. However, to allow TypeScript to accept the correct usage, a TypeScript option must be enabled within the application's `tsconfig` file. When enabled, the [`esModuleInterop`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#esModuleInterop) option provides better alignment with the ECMAScript specification and is also recommended by the TypeScript team. Once enabled, you can update package imports where applicable to an ECMAScript conformant form.
```

> Using the `moment` package as an example, the following application code will cause runtime errors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the [`moment`](https://npmjs.com/package/moment) package as an example, the following application code will cause runtime errors:
```

```ts
import * as moment from 'moment';

console.log(moment().format());
```

The build will generate a warning to notify you that there is a potential problem. The warning will be similar to:

<code-example format="shell" language="shell" hideCopy="true">
▲ [WARNING] Calling "moment" will crash at run-time because it's an import namespace object, not a function [call-import-namespace]

    src/main.ts:2:12:
      2 │ console.log(moment().format());
        ╵             ~~~~~~

  Consider changing "moment" to a default import instead:

    src/main.ts:1:7:
      1 │ import * as moment from 'moment';
        │        ~~~~~~~~~~~
        ╵        moment
</code-example>

However, you can avoid the runtime errors and the warning by enabling the `esModuleInterop` TypeScript option for the application and changing the import to the following:

```ts
import moment from 'moment';

console.log(moment().format());
```

## Vite as a development server

> The usage of `vite` in the Angular CLI is currently only within a _development server only_ capacity. Even without using the underlying `vite` build system, `vite` provides a full-featured development server with client side support that has been bundled into a low dependency npm package. This makes it an ideal candidate to provide comprehensive development server functionality. The current development server process uses the new build system to generate a development build of the application in memory and passes the results to `vite` to serve the application. The usage of `vite`, much like the Webpack-based development server, is encapsulated within the Angular CLI `dev-server` builder and currently cannot be directly configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The usage of `vite` in the Angular CLI is currently only within a _development server capacity only_. Even without using the underlying `vite` build system, `vite` provides a full-featured development server with client side support that has been bundled into a low dependency npm package. This makes it an ideal candidate to provide comprehensive development server functionality. The current development server process uses the new build system to generate a development build of the application in memory and passes the results to `vite` to serve the application. The usage of `vite`, much like the Webpack-based development server, is encapsulated within the Angular CLI `dev-server` builder and currently cannot be directly configured.
```

> ## Bug reports

Reviewer: Suggestion: Maybe move "Bug reports" after "Known issues" so readers are more likely to read that list first before reporting a duplicate bug?

Report issues and feature requests on [GitHub](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues).

Please provide a minimal reproduction where possible to aid the team in addressing issues.

## Known Issues

There are currently several known issues that you may encounter when trying the new build system. This list will be updated to stay current. If any of these issues are currently blocking you from trying out the new build system, please check back in the future as it may have been solved.

### Runtime-evaluated dynamic import expressions

> Dynamic import expressions that do not contain static values will be kept in their original form and not processed at build time. This is a limitation of the underlying bundler but is planned to be implemented in the future. In many cases, application code can be made to work by changing the import expressions into static strings with some form of conditional statement such as an `if` or `switch` for the known potential files.

Reviewer: Nit: Can we link to a relevant esbuild issue for this, since we call it out as a "limitation of the underlying bundler"?

Unsupported:

```ts
return await import(`/abc/${name}.json`);
```

Supported:

```ts
switch (name) {
  case 'x':
    return await import('/abc/x.json');
  case 'y':
    return await import('/abc/y.json');
  case 'z':
    return await import('/abc/z.json');
}
```

### Order-dependent side-effectful imports in lazy modules

> Import statements that are dependent on a specific statement ordering with an earlier import statement only present in a single lazy loaded module and the later import statement present in multiple modules may be emitted in the wrong order. This is not common as it depends on the usage of side-effectful modules and does not apply to the `polyfills` option. However, if you do encounter this situation, one possible workaround is to also add the earlier import to another lazy loaded module or entry point. This will force the earlier import to also be imported via a common module and not inlined in the wrong order. This is caused by a [defect](https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/issues/399) in the underlying bundler but will be addressed in a future update.

Reviewer: I'm still worried this section is simultaneously too specific about import relationships and also too vague about what that looks like to be useful in its current form. I think we either need to:
1. Make this more specific and add a concrete example we can illustrate.
2. Make this _less_ specific and say that uncommon import ordering patterns can cause top-level statements to execute out of order, and link to the esbuild issue for details.

I think 2. can work given the alert below which explains why this typically isn't a problem for Angular apps and following best practices mostly avoids it. It allows us to not get too into the weeds and delegate to esbuild about the specifics.

I'm ok either way, just two ideas for how we can make this paragraph more useful. WDYT?

<div class="alert is-important">

> Avoiding the use of modules with non-local side effects (outside of polyfills) is recommended whenever possible regardless of the build system being used. Modules with non-local side effects can have a negative effect on both application size and runtime performance.

Reviewer: I like this a lot, I think it helps contextualize why this shouldn't be a significant issue for Angular apps in particular following common code structures.

```suggestion
Avoiding the use of modules with non-local side effects (outside of polyfills) is recommended whenever possible regardless of the build system being used and avoids this particular issue. Modules with non-local side effects can have a negative effect on both application size and runtime performance as well.
```

Just making a little more clear that if users follow best practices they won't encounter this issue.

</div>

### Hashed filenames for non-injected global styles/scripts

> If your application currently uses the `"inject": false` sub-option for any global styles or scripts via the `styles` or `scripts` build options, the output file names for those styles/scripts will incorrectly contain a hash. Depending on the usage of the output files, this may cause runtime failures for your application. This problem is currently in the process of being resolved and has an [issue report](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25098) that can be tracked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your application currently uses the `"inject": false` sub-option for any global styles or scripts via the `styles` or `scripts` build options, the output file names for those styles/scripts will incorrectly contain a hash. Depending on the usage of the output files, this may cause runtime failures for your application. See the related [issue](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/25098) for more information.
```

Can we also link to the `scripts` and `styles` build options documentation here (or anything about `inject`)? If there's no good page for that, not too big a deal, but might help users unfamiliar with the `inject` option.

# Getting started with the CLI's esbuild-based build system

<div class="alert is-important">

> The esbuild-based ECMAScript module (ESM) application build system feature is available for [developer preview](https://angular.io/guide/releases#developer-preview).

Reviewer 2: You could make that link relative
```suggestion
The esbuild-based ECMAScript module (ESM) application build system feature is available for [developer preview](/guide/releases#developer-preview).
```

## Known Issues

There are currently several known issues that you may encounter when trying the new build system. This list will be updated to stay current. If any of these issues are currently blocking you from trying out the new build system, please check back in the future as it may have been solved.

### Runtime-evaluated dynamic import expressions

Dynamic import expressions that do not contain static values will be kept in their original form and not processed at build time. This is a limitation of the underlying bundler but is [planned](https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/pull/2508) to be implemented in the future. In many cases, application code can be made to work by changing the import expressions into static strings with some form of conditional statement such as an `if` or `switch` for the known potential files.

Unsupported:

```ts
return await import(`/abc/${name}.json`);
```

Supported:

```ts
switch (name) {
  case 'x':
    return await import('/abc/x.json');
  case 'y':
    return await import('/abc/y.json');
  case 'z':
    return await import('/abc/z.json');
}
```

### Order-dependent side-effectful imports in lazy modules

> Import statements that are dependent on a specific ordering that are also used in multiple lazy modules can cause top-level statements to be executed out of order.

Reviewer: Minor nit to reduce "that" usage for readability:

```suggestion
Import statements that are dependent on a specific ordering and are also used in multiple lazy modules can cause top-level statements to be executed out of order.
```
